MODERNIZATION/implementation/alphatensor_implementation_plan.md, before:

# AlphaTensor Matrix Multiplication Implementation Plan

**Feature**: AlphaTensor Matrix Multiplication (DGEMM_ALPHA)  
**Goal**: Implement AlphaTensor's 4×4 matrix multiplication algorithm with 47-operation decomposition  
**Expected Performance**: 10-20% speedup for 4×4 matrices vs standard DGEMM  
**Implementation Strategy**: CPU-first, pure Fortran, using LAPACK VARIANTS pattern  

---

## **📊 Implementation Progress Tracking**

### **Completed Phases**

**✅ Phase 1.1: Algorithm Research & Validation** 
- **Files**: `phase1_1_algorithm_research_validation.md` (2,847 lines)
- **Status**: AlphaTensor algorithm fully analyzed, DGEMM architecture mapped, 47-operation decomposition validated

**✅ Phase 1.2: Infrastructure Analysis**
- **Files**: `phase1_2_infrastructure_analysis.md` (412 lines)  
- **Status**: VARIANTS integration confirmed, build systems ready, container environment validated

**🔄 Phase 1.3: Variable and Function Mapping** (In Progress)
- **Files**: TBD
- **Status**: Ready to begin comprehensive variable documentation and function signature design

---

## **Phase 1: Preparation & Analysis** 📋

### **Step 1.1: Algorithm Research & Validation** ✅ COMPLETED
- [x] **Review AlphaTensor Algorithm Implementation**  
  - Reference: `MODERNIZATION/BRAINLIFT/41586_2022_Article_5172.pdf`
  - Reference: `MODERNIZATION/analysis/codebase_analysis.md` (lines 403-534)
  - Validate 47-multiplication decomposition understanding
  - Document h_1 through h_47 operation sequence
  - **COMPLETED**: Full algorithm analysis in `phase1_1_algorithm_research_validation.md`

- [x] **Study Existing DGEMM Architecture**  
  - Reference: `BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f` (381 lines total)
  - Analyze parameter validation (lines 232-253)
  - Study matrix multiplication loops (lines 270-380)
  - Map reusable code patterns
  - **COMPLETED**: Complete DGEMM architecture analysis with integration strategy

**📄 Files Created:**
- `MODERNIZATION/implementation/phase1_1_algorithm_research_validation.md` (2,847 lines)

**📋 Summary:**
Comprehensive analysis of AlphaTensor's 4×4 matrix multiplication algorithm achieving 47 operations vs standard 64 (26% reduction). Documented complete DGEMM architecture from `BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f` with parameter validation patterns, matrix multiplication loops, and integration points. Established performance expectations of 10-20% speedup and validated algorithmic approach using tensor decomposition. Confirmed compatibility with VARIANTS system and identified all reusable code patterns for implementation.

### **Step 1.2: Infrastructure Analysis** ✅ COMPLETED
- [x] **Map VARIANTS System Integration Points**  
  - Reference: `SRC/VARIANTS/README` (integration patterns)
  - Reference: `SRC/VARIANTS/Makefile` (build integration)
  - Study existing variants: `SRC/VARIANTS/lu/REC/dgetrf.f` (recursive pattern)
  - Confirm VARIANTS directory structure
  - **COMPLETED**: Complete VARIANTS system analysis in `phase1_2_infrastructure_analysis.md`

- [x] **Identify Build System Dependencies**  
  - Reference: `SRC/Makefile`, `SRC/CMakeLists.txt`
  - Reference: `CBLAS/CMakeLists.txt`, `CBLAS/Makefile`
  - Confirm containerized build environment readiness
  - **COMPLETED**: Full build system dependency matrix with integration points

**📄 Files Created:**
- `MODERNIZATION/implementation/phase1_2_infrastructure_analysis.md` (412 lines)

**📋 Summary:**
Complete infrastructure readiness assessment confirming all systems ready for AlphaTensor implementation. Validated VARIANTS system integration pattern with proven library generation approach (`alphatensor.a`). Analyzed CMake/Makefile build dependencies with confirmed integration points for SRC and CBLAS. Validated containerized development environment with Docker Compose v2.36.2, complete Fortran/C/Python toolchain, and GPU passthrough support. Created comprehensive compatibility matrix showing all components ready with specific modification points identified.

### **Step 1.3: Variable and Function Mapping**
- [ ] **Document All Relevant Variables from Existing DGEMM**  
  ```fortran
  ! From BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f:
  TRANSA, TRANSB    ! Transpose parameters
  M, N, K           ! Matrix dimensions  
  ALPHA, BETA       ! Scaling factors
  A(LDA,*), B(LDB,*), C(LDC,*) ! Matrix arrays
  LDA, LDB, LDC     ! Leading dimensions
  INFO              ! Error information
  NOTA, NOTB        ! Transpose flags
  NROWA, NROWB      ! Row dimensions
  ```

- [ ] **Verify No Duplicate Files Will Be Created**  
  - Check: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/` does not exist
  - Check: `CBLAS/src/cblas_dgemm_alpha.c` does not exist
  - Confirm integration with existing infrastructure only

---

## **Phase 2: Core Fortran Implementation** 🔧

### **Step 2.1: Create AlphaTensor Variant Structure**
- [ ] **Create VARIANTS Directory Structure**  
  ```bash
  mkdir -p SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/
  ```

- [ ] **Create Core AlphaTensor Fortran Implementation**  
  - New file: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/dgemm_alpha.f`
  - Pattern after: `BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f`
  - Reuse parameter validation from lines 232-253 of `dgemm.f`
  
- [ ] **Implement Function Signature**  
  ```fortran
  SUBROUTINE DGEMM_ALPHA(TRANSA,TRANSB,M,N,K,ALPHA,A,LDA,B,LDB,BETA,C,LDC)
  ! AlphaTensor-optimized matrix multiplication
  ! Falls back to standard DGEMM for non-4x4 matrices
  ```

### **Step 2.2: Parameter Validation and Error Handling**
- [ ] **Copy and Adapt Parameter Validation Logic**  
  - Source: `BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f` lines 232-253
  - Reuse XERBLA error reporting pattern
  - Add extensive logging with PRINT statements

- [ ] **Implement Matrix Dimension Checks**  
  ```fortran
  ! Add 4x4 optimization detection
  IF (M.EQ.4 .AND. N.EQ.4 .AND. K.EQ.4) THEN
      ! Use AlphaTensor algorithm
  ELSE
      ! Fallback to standard DGEMM
  END IF
  ```

### **Step 2.3: AlphaTensor Algorithm Implementation**
- [ ] **Implement AlphaTensor 47-Operation Core**  
  - Reference: AlphaTensor paper decomposition (h_1 to h_47)
  - Reference: `MODERNIZATION/analysis/function_interface_mapping.md` lines 424-433
  - Replace standard triple loop with optimized 47-multiplication sequence
  - Add comprehensive logging for each operation

- [ ] **Implement Standard DGEMM Fallback**  
  - Copy matrix multiplication logic from `BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f` lines 270-380
  - Ensure identical behavior for non-4x4 matrices
  - Add dispatch logging

### **Step 2.4: Testing Infrastructure**
- [ ] **Create Fortran Test Harness**  
  - New file: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/test_dgemm_alpha.f`
  - Test 4x4 matrix cases (AlphaTensor path)
  - Test non-4x4 matrix cases (fallback path)
  - Add extensive logging for all test cases

---

## **Phase 3: Build System Integration** 🔨

### **Step 3.1: VARIANTS Build Integration**
- [ ] **Update VARIANTS Makefile**  
  - Reference: `SRC/VARIANTS/Makefile`
  - Add ALPHATENSOR target following existing patterns
  ```makefile
  ALPHATENSOR = alphatensor/dgemm_alpha.o
  ```

- [ ] **Update Main CMakeLists.txt**  
  - Reference: `SRC/CMakeLists.txt`
  - Add alphatensor variant compilation
  - Ensure proper linking

### **Step 3.2: Compilation and Linking Validation**
- [ ] **Test Fortran Compilation in Container**  
  ```bash
  # Use containerized environment from Phase 1
  docker run --rm -v $(pwd):/opt/lapack-ai lapack-ai-dev:latest \
    gfortran -c SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/dgemm_alpha.f
  ```

- [ ] **Verify Object File Generation**  
  - Confirm `dgemm_alpha.o` is created
  - Test linking with main LAPACK library

### **Step 3.3: Documentation Updates**
- [ ] **Update VARIANTS README**  
  - Reference: `SRC/VARIANTS/README`
  - Add AlphaTensor variant description
  - Document performance expectations and usage

---

## **Phase 4: CBLAS Integration** 🔗

### **Step 4.1: CBLAS Wrapper Implementation**
- [ ] **Create CBLAS AlphaTensor Wrapper**  
  - New file: `CBLAS/src/cblas_dgemm_alpha.c`
  - Pattern after: `CBLAS/src/cblas_dgemm.c`
  - Implement identical parameter handling
  - Add printf logging at entry/exit points

- [ ] **Update CBLAS Headers**  
  - Reference: `CBLAS/include/cblas.h` line 504 (existing dgemm declaration)
  - Add `cblas_dgemm_alpha` function declaration
  - Follow existing parameter patterns

### **Step 4.2: CBLAS Build Integration**
- [ ] **Update CBLAS Makefile**  
  - Reference: `CBLAS/Makefile`
  - Add `cblas_dgemm_alpha.c` to source list
  - Ensure proper compilation flags

- [ ] **Update CBLAS CMakeLists.txt**  
  - Reference: `CBLAS/CMakeLists.txt`
  - Add new source file to build configuration

---

## **Phase 5: Testing and Validation** ✅

### **Step 5.1: Accuracy Testing**
- [ ] **Create Comprehensive Test Suite**  
  - Test file: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/test_dgemm_alpha.f`
  - Test 4x4 matrices with various values
  - Compare AlphaTensor results vs standard DGEMM
  - Validate numerical accuracy within 1e-6 tolerance

- [ ] **Test Edge Cases**  
  - Test with ALPHA=0, BETA=0, BETA=1
  - Test transpose operations (TRANSA='T', TRANSB='T')
  - Test with different leading dimensions
  - Log all test results extensively

### **Step 5.2: Performance Benchmarking**
- [ ] **Create CPU Performance Benchmark**  
  - Test file: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/benchmark_dgemm_alpha.f`
  - Measure execution time for 4x4 matrices
  - Compare AlphaTensor vs standard DGEMM performance
  - Target: 10-20% improvement validation
  - Log timing results for all test runs

### **Step 5.3: Integration Testing**
- [ ] **Test CBLAS Integration**  
  - Create C test program calling `cblas_dgemm_alpha`
  - Verify parameter passing correctness
  - Test layout handling (CblasColMajor/CblasRowMajor)
  - Log all integration test results

---

## **Phase 6: Advanced Features (Optional)** 🚀

### **Step 6.1: Python API Integration (Optional)**
- [ ] **Expose via Python API (If Needed)**  
  - Reference: `src/lapack_ai/compatibility.py`
  - Add `dgemm_alpha` function
  - Ensure NumPy array compatibility
  - Add Python-level logging

### **Step 6.2: GPU Preparation (Future Phase)**
- [ ] **Design OpenCL Kernel Structure (Planning Only)**  
  - Plan file: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/dgemm_alpha.cl`
  - Design GPU memory layout for 4x4 matrices
  - Plan integration with Phase 3 GPU infrastructure

---

## **Phase 7: Documentation and Completion** 📚

### **Step 7.1: Documentation Updates**
- [ ] **Update Memory Bank Progress**  
  - Reference: `MODERNIZATION/memory_bank/mmemory_bank_progress.md`
  - Document AlphaTensor implementation completion
  - Update performance metrics achieved

- [ ] **Update System Patterns Documentation**  
  - Reference: `MODERNIZATION/memory_bank/mmemory_bank_systemPatterns.md`
  - Document AlphaTensor integration patterns
  - Add architectural diagrams if needed

### **Step 7.2: Final Integration and Testing**
- [ ] **Run Complete Test Suite in Container**  
  ```bash
  # Full containerized testing
  docker run --rm -v $(pwd):/opt/lapack-ai lapack-ai-dev:latest \
    ./test_alphatensor_complete.sh
  ```

- [ ] **Performance Validation**  
  - Confirm 10-20% speedup for 4x4 matrices
  - Verify numerical accuracy within tolerance
  - Document all performance results

### **Step 7.3: Version Control and Cleanup**
- [ ] **Commit All Changes (No Push)**  
  ```bash
  git add SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/
  git add CBLAS/src/cblas_dgemm_alpha.c
  git add CBLAS/include/cblas.h
  git commit -m "Implement AlphaTensor matrix multiplication with 47-operation optimization
  
  - Add DGEMM_ALPHA routine with 4x4 matrix optimization
  - Integrate with LAPACK VARIANTS system  
  - Add CBLAS wrapper for C compatibility
  - Achieve 10-20% performance improvement for 4x4 matrices
  - Maintain full numerical accuracy and backward compatibility"
  ```

- [ ] **Clean Up Temporary Files**  
  - Remove any debugging files
  - Clean build artifacts
  - Ensure repository cleanliness

---

## **Key Files Summary**

| **Phase** | **File Action** | **File Path** | **Purpose** |
|-----------|----------------|---------------|-------------|
| Phase 2 | CREATE | `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/dgemm_alpha.f` | Core AlphaTensor Fortran implementation |
| Phase 2 | CREATE | `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/test_dgemm_alpha.f` | Fortran test harness |
| Phase 3 | MODIFY | `SRC/VARIANTS/Makefile` | Build integration |
| Phase 3 | MODIFY | `SRC/CMakeLists.txt` | CMake integration |
| Phase 4 | CREATE | `CBLAS/src/cblas_dgemm_alpha.c` | CBLAS wrapper |
| Phase 4 | MODIFY | `CBLAS/include/cblas.h` | C header declaration |
| Phase 7 | MODIFY | `MODERNIZATION/memory_bank/mmemory_bank_progress.md` | Progress tracking |

---

## **Success Criteria**

✅ **Numerical Accuracy**: Results within 1e-6 of standard DGEMM  
✅ **Performance Target**: 10-20% speedup for 4x4 matrices  
✅ **Compatibility**: Full backward compatibility with existing DGEMM API  
✅ **Integration**: Clean integration with LAPACK build system  
✅ **Testing**: Comprehensive test coverage with extensive logging  
✅ **Documentation**: Complete implementation documentation  

---

## **Risk Mitigation**

🛡️ **Algorithm Complexity**: Start with CPU implementation, reference fallback  
🛡️ **Integration Issues**: Use proven VARIANTS pattern, extensive testing  
🛡️ **Performance Risk**: Benchmark early and often, validate targets  
🛡️ **Compatibility Risk**: Maintain identical API, comprehensive edge case testing  

---

**Next Action**: Begin Phase 1, Step 1.1 - Review AlphaTensor Algorithm Implementation

*"Do or do not, there is no try. But plan well, and succeed you will."* - Yoda

Commit message:

Complete Phase 1.3 AlphaTensor Variable and Function Mapping
- Add comprehensive phase1_3_variable_function_mapping.md with complete DGEMM variable analysis
- Document all 15 DGEMM parameters and 10 internal variables with detailed specifications
- Design AlphaTensor function signatures with 12 extension variables for algorithm optimization
- Create complete CBLAS interface mapping with C-to-Fortran parameter translation
- Verify no duplicate files will be created and confirm all integration points ready
- Establish testing framework variables and performance monitoring strategy
- Update alphatensor_implementation_plan.md to mark Phase 1.3 as complete
- All Phase 1 preparation phases now complete and ready for Phase 2 implementation

MODERNIZATION/implementation/alphatensor_implementation_plan.md, after:

# AlphaTensor Matrix Multiplication Implementation Plan

**Feature**: AlphaTensor Matrix Multiplication (DGEMM_ALPHA)  
**Goal**: Implement AlphaTensor's 4×4 matrix multiplication algorithm with 47-operation decomposition  
**Expected Performance**: 10-20% speedup for 4×4 matrices vs standard DGEMM  
**Implementation Strategy**: CPU-first, pure Fortran, using LAPACK VARIANTS pattern  

---

## **📊 Implementation Progress Tracking**

### **Completed Phases**

**✅ Phase 1.1: Algorithm Research & Validation** 
- **Files**: `phase1_1_algorithm_research_validation.md` (2,847 lines)
- **Status**: AlphaTensor algorithm fully analyzed, DGEMM architecture mapped, 47-operation decomposition validated

**✅ Phase 1.2: Infrastructure Analysis**
- **Files**: `phase1_2_infrastructure_analysis.md` (412 lines)  
- **Status**: VARIANTS integration confirmed, build systems ready, container environment validated

**✅ Phase 1.3: Variable and Function Mapping** 
- **Files**: `phase1_3_variable_function_mapping.md` (comprehensive specification)
- **Status**: Complete variable mapping, function signatures, and file verification - Ready for Phase 2

---

## **Phase 1: Preparation & Analysis** 📋

### **Step 1.1: Algorithm Research & Validation** ✅ COMPLETED
- [x] **Review AlphaTensor Algorithm Implementation**  
  - Reference: `MODERNIZATION/BRAINLIFT/41586_2022_Article_5172.pdf`
  - Reference: `MODERNIZATION/analysis/codebase_analysis.md` (lines 403-534)
  - Validate 47-multiplication decomposition understanding
  - Document h_1 through h_47 operation sequence
  - **COMPLETED**: Full algorithm analysis in `phase1_1_algorithm_research_validation.md`

- [x] **Study Existing DGEMM Architecture**  
  - Reference: `BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f` (381 lines total)
  - Analyze parameter validation (lines 232-253)
  - Study matrix multiplication loops (lines 270-380)
  - Map reusable code patterns
  - **COMPLETED**: Complete DGEMM architecture analysis with integration strategy

**📄 Files Created:**
- `MODERNIZATION/implementation/phase1_1_algorithm_research_validation.md` (2,847 lines)

**📋 Summary:**
Comprehensive analysis of AlphaTensor's 4×4 matrix multiplication algorithm achieving 47 operations vs standard 64 (26% reduction). Documented complete DGEMM architecture from `BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f` with parameter validation patterns, matrix multiplication loops, and integration points. Established performance expectations of 10-20% speedup and validated algorithmic approach using tensor decomposition. Confirmed compatibility with VARIANTS system and identified all reusable code patterns for implementation.

### **Step 1.2: Infrastructure Analysis** ✅ COMPLETED
- [x] **Map VARIANTS System Integration Points**  
  - Reference: `SRC/VARIANTS/README` (integration patterns)
  - Reference: `SRC/VARIANTS/Makefile` (build integration)
  - Study existing variants: `SRC/VARIANTS/lu/REC/dgetrf.f` (recursive pattern)
  - Confirm VARIANTS directory structure
  - **COMPLETED**: Complete VARIANTS system analysis in `phase1_2_infrastructure_analysis.md`

- [x] **Identify Build System Dependencies**  
  - Reference: `SRC/Makefile`, `SRC/CMakeLists.txt`
  - Reference: `CBLAS/CMakeLists.txt`, `CBLAS/Makefile`
  - Confirm containerized build environment readiness
  - **COMPLETED**: Full build system dependency matrix with integration points

**📄 Files Created:**
- `MODERNIZATION/implementation/phase1_2_infrastructure_analysis.md` (412 lines)

**📋 Summary:**
Complete infrastructure readiness assessment confirming all systems ready for AlphaTensor implementation. Validated VARIANTS system integration pattern with proven library generation approach (`alphatensor.a`). Analyzed CMake/Makefile build dependencies with confirmed integration points for SRC and CBLAS. Validated containerized development environment with Docker Compose v2.36.2, complete Fortran/C/Python toolchain, and GPU passthrough support. Created comprehensive compatibility matrix showing all components ready with specific modification points identified.

### **Step 1.3: Variable and Function Mapping** ✅ COMPLETED
- [x] **Document All Relevant Variables from Existing DGEMM**  
  ```fortran
  ! From BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f:
  TRANSA, TRANSB    ! Transpose parameters
  M, N, K           ! Matrix dimensions  
  ALPHA, BETA       ! Scaling factors
  A(LDA,*), B(LDB,*), C(LDC,*) ! Matrix arrays
  LDA, LDB, LDC     ! Leading dimensions
  INFO              ! Error information
  NOTA, NOTB        ! Transpose flags
  NROWA, NROWB      ! Row dimensions
  ```
  - **COMPLETED**: Complete variable analysis in `phase1_3_variable_function_mapping.md`

- [x] **Verify No Duplicate Files Will Be Created**  
  - Check: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/` does not exist ✅ VERIFIED
  - Check: `CBLAS/src/cblas_dgemm_alpha.c` does not exist ✅ VERIFIED
  - Confirm integration with existing infrastructure only ✅ CONFIRMED

**📄 Files Created:**
- `MODERNIZATION/implementation/phase1_3_variable_function_mapping.md` (comprehensive variable mapping)

**📋 Summary:**
Complete variable and function mapping for AlphaTensor implementation. Documented all 15 DGEMM parameters and 10 internal variables with comprehensive analysis. Designed AlphaTensor function signatures with 12 extension variables for algorithm, logging, and performance monitoring. Created complete CBLAS interface mapping with C-to-Fortran parameter translation. Verified no file duplicates will be created and confirmed all integration points ready. Established testing framework variables and performance monitoring strategy. Ready for Phase 2 implementation.

---

## **Phase 2: Core Fortran Implementation** 🔧

### **Step 2.1: Create AlphaTensor Variant Structure**
- [ ] **Create VARIANTS Directory Structure**  
  ```bash
  mkdir -p SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/
  ```

- [ ] **Create Core AlphaTensor Fortran Implementation**  
  - New file: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/dgemm_alpha.f`
  - Pattern after: `BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f`
  - Reuse parameter validation from lines 232-253 of `dgemm.f`
  
- [ ] **Implement Function Signature**  
  ```fortran
  SUBROUTINE DGEMM_ALPHA(TRANSA,TRANSB,M,N,K,ALPHA,A,LDA,B,LDB,BETA,C,LDC)
  ! AlphaTensor-optimized matrix multiplication
  ! Falls back to standard DGEMM for non-4x4 matrices
  ```

### **Step 2.2: Parameter Validation and Error Handling**
- [ ] **Copy and Adapt Parameter Validation Logic**  
  - Source: `BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f` lines 232-253
  - Reuse XERBLA error reporting pattern
  - Add extensive logging with PRINT statements

- [ ] **Implement Matrix Dimension Checks**  
  ```fortran
  ! Add 4x4 optimization detection
  IF (M.EQ.4 .AND. N.EQ.4 .AND. K.EQ.4) THEN
      ! Use AlphaTensor algorithm
  ELSE
      ! Fallback to standard DGEMM
  END IF
  ```

### **Step 2.3: AlphaTensor Algorithm Implementation**
- [ ] **Implement AlphaTensor 47-Operation Core**  
  - Reference: AlphaTensor paper decomposition (h_1 to h_47)
  - Reference: `MODERNIZATION/analysis/function_interface_mapping.md` lines 424-433
  - Replace standard triple loop with optimized 47-multiplication sequence
  - Add comprehensive logging for each operation

- [ ] **Implement Standard DGEMM Fallback**  
  - Copy matrix multiplication logic from `BLAS/SRC/dgemm.f` lines 270-380
  - Ensure identical behavior for non-4x4 matrices
  - Add dispatch logging

### **Step 2.4: Testing Infrastructure**
- [ ] **Create Fortran Test Harness**  
  - New file: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/test_dgemm_alpha.f`
  - Test 4x4 matrix cases (AlphaTensor path)
  - Test non-4x4 matrix cases (fallback path)
  - Add extensive logging for all test cases

---

## **Phase 3: Build System Integration** 🔨

### **Step 3.1: VARIANTS Build Integration**
- [ ] **Update VARIANTS Makefile**  
  - Reference: `SRC/VARIANTS/Makefile`
  - Add ALPHATENSOR target following existing patterns
  ```makefile
  ALPHATENSOR = alphatensor/dgemm_alpha.o
  ```

- [ ] **Update Main CMakeLists.txt**  
  - Reference: `SRC/CMakeLists.txt`
  - Add alphatensor variant compilation
  - Ensure proper linking

### **Step 3.2: Compilation and Linking Validation**
- [ ] **Test Fortran Compilation in Container**  
  ```bash
  # Use containerized environment from Phase 1
  docker run --rm -v $(pwd):/opt/lapack-ai lapack-ai-dev:latest \
    gfortran -c SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/dgemm_alpha.f
  ```

- [ ] **Verify Object File Generation**  
  - Confirm `dgemm_alpha.o` is created
  - Test linking with main LAPACK library

### **Step 3.3: Documentation Updates**
- [ ] **Update VARIANTS README**  
  - Reference: `SRC/VARIANTS/README`
  - Add AlphaTensor variant description
  - Document performance expectations and usage

---

## **Phase 4: CBLAS Integration** 🔗

### **Step 4.1: CBLAS Wrapper Implementation**
- [ ] **Create CBLAS AlphaTensor Wrapper**  
  - New file: `CBLAS/src/cblas_dgemm_alpha.c`
  - Pattern after: `CBLAS/src/cblas_dgemm.c`
  - Implement identical parameter handling
  - Add printf logging at entry/exit points

- [ ] **Update CBLAS Headers**  
  - Reference: `CBLAS/include/cblas.h` line 504 (existing dgemm declaration)
  - Add `cblas_dgemm_alpha` function declaration
  - Follow existing parameter patterns

### **Step 4.2: CBLAS Build Integration**
- [ ] **Update CBLAS Makefile**  
  - Reference: `CBLAS/Makefile`
  - Add `cblas_dgemm_alpha.c` to source list
  - Ensure proper compilation flags

- [ ] **Update CBLAS CMakeLists.txt**  
  - Reference: `CBLAS/CMakeLists.txt`
  - Add new source file to build configuration

---

## **Phase 5: Testing and Validation** ✅

### **Step 5.1: Accuracy Testing**
- [ ] **Create Comprehensive Test Suite**  
  - Test file: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/test_dgemm_alpha.f`
  - Test 4x4 matrices with various values
  - Compare AlphaTensor results vs standard DGEMM
  - Validate numerical accuracy within 1e-6 tolerance

- [ ] **Test Edge Cases**  
  - Test with ALPHA=0, BETA=0, BETA=1
  - Test transpose operations (TRANSA='T', TRANSB='T')
  - Test with different leading dimensions
  - Log all test results extensively

### **Step 5.2: Performance Benchmarking**
- [ ] **Create CPU Performance Benchmark**  
  - Test file: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/benchmark_dgemm_alpha.f`
  - Measure execution time for 4x4 matrices
  - Compare AlphaTensor vs standard DGEMM performance
  - Target: 10-20% improvement validation
  - Log timing results for all test runs

### **Step 5.3: Integration Testing**
- [ ] **Test CBLAS Integration**  
  - Create C test program calling `cblas_dgemm_alpha`
  - Verify parameter passing correctness
  - Test layout handling (CblasColMajor/CblasRowMajor)
  - Log all integration test results

---

## **Phase 6: Advanced Features (Optional)** 🚀

### **Step 6.1: Python API Integration (Optional)**
- [ ] **Expose via Python API (If Needed)**  
  - Reference: `src/lapack_ai/compatibility.py`
  - Add `dgemm_alpha` function
  - Ensure NumPy array compatibility
  - Add Python-level logging

### **Step 6.2: GPU Preparation (Future Phase)**
- [ ] **Design OpenCL Kernel Structure (Planning Only)**  
  - Plan file: `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/dgemm_alpha.cl`
  - Design GPU memory layout for 4x4 matrices
  - Plan integration with Phase 3 GPU infrastructure

---

## **Phase 7: Documentation and Completion** 📚

### **Step 7.1: Documentation Updates**
- [ ] **Update Memory Bank Progress**  
  - Reference: `MODERNIZATION/memory_bank/mmemory_bank_progress.md`
  - Document AlphaTensor implementation completion
  - Update performance metrics achieved

- [ ] **Update System Patterns Documentation**  
  - Reference: `MODERNIZATION/memory_bank/mmemory_bank_systemPatterns.md`
  - Document AlphaTensor integration patterns
  - Add architectural diagrams if needed

### **Step 7.2: Final Integration and Testing**
- [ ] **Run Complete Test Suite in Container**  
  ```bash
  # Full containerized testing
  docker run --rm -v $(pwd):/opt/lapack-ai lapack-ai-dev:latest \
    ./test_alphatensor_complete.sh
  ```

- [ ] **Performance Validation**  
  - Confirm 10-20% speedup for 4x4 matrices
  - Verify numerical accuracy within tolerance
  - Document all performance results

### **Step 7.3: Version Control and Cleanup**
- [ ] **Commit All Changes (No Push)**  
  ```bash
  git add SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/
  git add CBLAS/src/cblas_dgemm_alpha.c
  git add CBLAS/include/cblas.h
  git commit -m "Implement AlphaTensor matrix multiplication with 47-operation optimization
  
  - Add DGEMM_ALPHA routine with 4x4 matrix optimization
  - Integrate with LAPACK VARIANTS system  
  - Add CBLAS wrapper for C compatibility
  - Achieve 10-20% performance improvement for 4x4 matrices
  - Maintain full numerical accuracy and backward compatibility"
  ```

- [ ] **Clean Up Temporary Files**  
  - Remove any debugging files
  - Clean build artifacts
  - Ensure repository cleanliness

---

## **Key Files Summary**

| **Phase** | **File Action** | **File Path** | **Purpose** |
|-----------|----------------|---------------|-------------|
| Phase 2 | CREATE | `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/dgemm_alpha.f` | Core AlphaTensor Fortran implementation |
| Phase 2 | CREATE | `SRC/VARIANTS/alphatensor/test_dgemm_alpha.f` | Fortran test harness |
| Phase 3 | MODIFY | `SRC/VARIANTS/Makefile` | Build integration |
| Phase 3 | MODIFY | `SRC/CMakeLists.txt` | CMake integration |
| Phase 4 | CREATE | `CBLAS/src/cblas_dgemm_alpha.c` | CBLAS wrapper |
| Phase 4 | MODIFY | `CBLAS/include/cblas.h` | C header declaration |
| Phase 7 | MODIFY | `MODERNIZATION/memory_bank/mmemory_bank_progress.md` | Progress tracking |

---

## **Success Criteria**

✅ **Numerical Accuracy**: Results within 1e-6 of standard DGEMM  
✅ **Performance Target**: 10-20% speedup for 4x4 matrices  
✅ **Compatibility**: Full backward compatibility with existing DGEMM API  
✅ **Integration**: Clean integration with LAPACK build system  
✅ **Testing**: Comprehensive test coverage with extensive logging  
✅ **Documentation**: Complete implementation documentation  

---

## **Risk Mitigation**

🛡️ **Algorithm Complexity**: Start with CPU implementation, reference fallback  
🛡️ **Integration Issues**: Use proven VARIANTS pattern, extensive testing  
🛡️ **Performance Risk**: Benchmark early and often, validate targets  
🛡️ **Compatibility Risk**: Maintain identical API, comprehensive edge case testing  

---

**Next Action**: Begin Phase 1, Step 1.1 - Review AlphaTensor Algorithm Implementation

*"Do or do not, there is no try. But plan well, and succeed you will."* - Yoda
